part of what's going on in atheist
activism is a hundred percent ego it's a
hundred percent people chasing Fame it's
good-looking young women who want to be
the next Jaclyn Glenn period there are
young men who want to be the next what's
the guy's name rationality rules they're
these cats they they want to be famous
and they want to be admired and some of
them there's the further ego trip of
wanting to make ostentatious use of
their book learning of presenting
themselves as an expert in philosophy
and logic and science that's a really
toxic really not just future but I do
get it there are people who are way more
emotionally damaged than you are you're
really not emotionally messed up by this
at all there are people who are
emotionally damaged by the transition
they made from believing in God to
atheism and for whom they have that
touchstone they remember they remember
the crucial importance of some YouTube
video or of some personality on YouTube
talking about their own experience
talking about their own loss of faith
these kinds of things and then that has
become the dominant assumption of what
activism is supposed to be of what's
supposed to mean you know you know what
nobody ever says nobody ever says that
tolerance and progress are fundamentally
incompatible it was like I mean the
tolerance sounds like such an easy
virtue to preach what what's what's
actually gonna change about circumcision
when is that gonna end right like even
the baby steps towards ending it even if
you don't make it illegal overnight it's
gonna be intolerant it's gonna be
confronting tradition and saying no
we're not going to tolerate this or we
don't want to tolerate this tradition we
want progress watching I'm really asking
how does this story end this story
that's been going on for 2,000 years how
is it gonna end I do not think it's
gonna end with YouTube channels and
Facebook posts seeing in a kind of
smarmy self-righteous way oh well isn't
it Queen
that the legislators in Canada still say
prayers and in some cases still have
Christian crosses on the walls it's
gonna be activism of a very very active
kind it's it's not gonna be what the
Richard Dawkins foundation is doing with
its money and prestige and fame which is
nothing what they're doing is nothing
I'm an unusual person
I've lived in different countries all
over the world and everywhere I lived I
read the Constitution I got my
girlfriend on the phone so Melissa you
used to live with me in British Columbia
Canada right that's right I take it you
have never read the constitution of
Canada well it must have occurred to you
that life in Canada it's very very
similar to life in the United States
right Canadians watch American TV and
Canadians go around kind of thinking oh
well on American television you have the
right to remain silent so here in Canada
you know you probably have the right to
remain silent too and in America you
have the separation of church and state
so here in Canada we must have the
separation of church and state - right
and I assume I look a little fast and
open in a way do you feel like religion
played more or less of a role in public
life in Canada versus the estate's where
do you think religion was more of a
dominant influence Canada versus the
United States well for my personal
experience I would say that my life was
more influenced by religion in the
United States nurses when I lived in
British Columbia but I know that
bounine you were voting in the church
that's right that's right I cast I cast
my ballot the vote literally took place
inside a church the place where I went
to vote was a church go on just just
making that clear for the audience yeah
the church but anyway yeah the main
point is that you were born in church
yes that was a little that was a little
reminder so in the United States where
have you voted but when you voted like
City Hall or something right
some kind of governmental school right I
was in your community center okay yeah
so in the United States you have this
principle of separation of church and
state
Oh would it surprise you if I told you
that the first sentence of the Canadian
Constitution is quote Canada is founded
upon principles that recognize the
supremacy of God
close call now what what year do you
think that was written it I mean the
United States you guys are really used
to worshipping your your Constitution as
this kind of ancient moth-eaten relic of
a but I think most Americans you imagine
that the the Constitution was written
almost in a different world by men of a
very different intellectual character
from anyone is alive today what do you
think what do you think Canada set their
own in stone this principle that were a
Christian nation based on the supremacy
of God I actually don't know it's funny
I know I know
that's what the truth is I'm not doing
this to you my girlfriend it's it's to
get at the fact that these principles
they kind of they surround us and they
pervade our daily lives but most of us
are completely unaware of them all the
time we don't you know if you if you
don't make it a point most people
go to Cambodia don't read the
constitution of Cambodia I did most
people live in Thailand or even go on
vacation don't take an interest in the
you know legal underpinnings of the heat
of what we experienced politically here
and now but i okay
I Got News for you constitution of
Canada was written in 1982 okay so long
before you were born long before you
were born 1982 I think that was when
like dudes having neon pink shoelaces
was briefly in style guys wearing guys
wearing converse with pink shoelaces you
know oh yeah
the ghazal sunglasses you know that this
is not this is not ancient history I
think that died in the 70s but hey we
could check 1982 were there still roller
rinks when the Canadian Constitution was
written so this is a this is a modern
contemporary problem that's still that's
still really ongoing now the side of
this you don't know melissap you'll be
able to relate to by allegory well one
of your attention to is the weakness of
the discourse about activism within
atheist activism so of course I can
sympathize of course I can but it's it's
really depressing in a really hopeless
to behold the Richard Dawkins foundation
they just put up an article on their
website about the fact that in Canada
basically we still have prayer inside
our houses of parliament houses the
Parliament plural we basically have one
parliament for each province plus one
and Ottawa not worth describing prayer
and even crosses hanging on the wall
Christian cross the wall it's common in
the parliaments of Canada including
specifically the Parliament for for
British Columbia Wow
what are you going to do about it what
are you gonna do about what would be the
form of activism to challenge this
because it's a fundamentally different
challenge from what you guys are used to
the United States the United States
every so often you have these
controversies of you know somebody has
displayed the 10 commandments in front
of a court house someone at City Hall or
state legislature has a monument to
Moses and the Ten Commandments and then
atheist activists or secular activists
or even the American Satanist Party they
get out and say no no no in the
Constitution we're supposed to have
separation of church and state right
well what kind of activism are you gonna
have when the Constitution is not on
your side when the Constitution says is
quote Canada is founded upon principles
that recognize the supremacy of God that
is right so so activism requires action
like to an unbelievable extent the
standards or what will be required that
would be involved here it's really
really high so the problem is in my
opinion the indirect influence of
Richard Dawkins himself Richard Dawkins
had a hit book in 2006 that was called
The God Delusion you you would have been
around to remember that no were you in
university or what when did you I mean
do you remember some ripples do you
remember that being discussed on the
radio or Oprah or whatever or no okay
you were playing diddy kong racing or
something you were playing
[Laughter]
that was the face that was the phase
when you were still in choir you were
still singing religious songs but I
assumed you were you were not you were
not a believer you were not praying or
anything at that age yet I was going to
church Wow
but I was kind of seeing through it at
that point Wow okay so you were still on
the fence isn't that interesting
well when The God Delusion came out it
was a big deal in the mainstream media
you know it got talked about on crappy
TV new shows and radio shows a lot it
was a it was a hit book and I think most
people the main thing that impacted them
was just the title just that here was a
kind of respectable scientist publishing
a book that really directly challenged
you know Christian religion of course it
also challenges Judaism and Islam to
some extent and saying no you know this
is all wrong this is a delusion and that
became a major talking point my problem
is here talking is not activism I think
what this ended up enshrining was
exactly the assumption that people
making YouTube videos you know and just
fetching on YouTube that that is
activism even that that's like the
ultimate format here you can imagine
this from a parallel life for you well
oh come at us I don't know I mean I
don't know if you have a moment where
emotionally you feel that's when your
faith started to crack that's when you
parted ways with the church the YouTube
obsession and the idea of talking as
activism talking replacing activism it's
partly ego it's partly people wanting to
get famous sure but I think there's also
a really sincere emotional connection
people have to that memory of how they
once saw a YouTube video
maybe back when they were in high school
playing diddy kong racing on the n64
whatever you know back when they were
that age they saw maybe Richard Dawkins
himself maybe another one of these
YouTube personalities talking about the
Bible and faith
than atheism and that was for them
personally and emotionally significant
touched on a turning point and they may
be on some level they want to do that
for others or they imagine that's the
way forward for atheist activism quite
quite unexamined for you is there a
moment like that is there is there I'm
an emotionally significant touch no no
no I was able to become more comfortable
comfortable questioning it after I left
my parents house once I went to
university yeah I took a philosophy
class philosophy of religion after that
point I decided that I didn't but I
don't have a just coming back to the
class was the professor kind of trying
to make people more Christian or no and
what was the professor's kind of basic
approach because I've had professors
have known professors who were like
legitimately dogmatic Christians Joe
Mack dogmatic Jews also really we're
trying to use their class as a way to
make the students more religious go on
no I don't I did not get that sense from
the professor I more remember of the
smaller classes so the we had a large
lecture hall yeah for setting and then
discussion class that was once a week
and I remember more the person who led
that discussion class just because it
was a smaller classroom well make you a
believer Christian so III totally
appreciate that just asking this
sometimes that's that's the effect as
you go to a class where people are
making the argument for the Bible and
that turns you away no I just know
without insulting you or insulting your
professor you and I have done a lot of
talk about the Bible what's actually in
the text of the Bible just lately and it
does not seem that you walked away from
that class with a lot of knowledge of
obscure you didn't so it wasn't it
wasn't the course that was really based
on reading and confronting what's in the
Bible as opposed to your expectations I
think of anything you've had that
experience just now just in the last
couple of weeks you've been reading the
Bible and
whoa there was a huge gap between what
people say about the Bible and what's
actually in the text it did not inspire
me to read the Bible right so what until
recently because you know like I like I
said I was finally living out of the
house and not having to answer to my
parents and it's only been recently like
that I've been spending time with them
again that they've been asking me like
they've been asking me about it and the
reason why I've gotten more interested
in it it's just because I want to be
able to say why and defend it or you
know yeah so yeah I mean to get back to
your point about talking it's not
activism I said like the general the
field that I get in in the United States
and in terms of talking about religion I
think it's become more open to be
atheist or to be questioning here but
generally like I think people still
believe in God like all right as like
they they're they're theus but a lot of
like it's becoming more and more popular
to be agnostic yep well you see just to
give an example you know the percentage
of people in the American military who
are Christian is lower than the
percentage in the general population and
of course the fundamental reason for
that is that people in the military are
younger than the general population but
you know the type of guys you sign up to
join the army they're probably more
conservative so they're an interesting
cross-section but even a very simple
system it represents an overall
generational drift yes yes absolutely so
yeah I think you know my parents had
become more open to that I think with
like the the thing that I've been
talking about with you is that you know
I tell you have extremist views on
things like so once I start learning
more about something I think wow I can't
believe that this is still common
in society it's or like we're still
having a society so the people that are
saying that the Bible should be relevant
at this point is and this is her shock
just to be clear guys this is your shock
having just gone back and started
reading the Bible like really because
you know the Bible just wasn't much of a
part of your life for 10 years or
something you know so no I just just
there's no more sympathetic for the
audience it's reading the Bible and
realizing wow this is such a mess and
this is you know it's just
intellectually not respectable basically
would lead somebody to not read the
Bible that's you know for my experience
yep you're raised with these certain
stories from the Bible that you hear
growing up as a child but it's not like
what they inspire you to go in revival
in church either like the the culture of
pious ignorance includes being piously
ignorant about what the Bible actually
says or problems in the text right yes
the other contrast you got sewing
Melissa you you don't just have the
contrast between having been raised
Christian and being atheist now the
other contrast you got is between the
obsession with activism that goes on
within the vegan movement and then this
assumption about YouTube and radio talk
shows and other you know talking as
activism which again for me it's really
is centered around symbolically someone
like Richard Dawkins you know in in
atheist activism so that I'd say I think
that's another that's another contrast
now both both can be criticized both are
blameworthy in various ways like you
might say there's almost a fetish in
vegan activism for the street rebel it
accomplishes nothing but rebellion
on the street is valorized by summer but
that's the realest most meaningful form
of activism you know and there's a whole
discourse surrounding that but then so
this is a total contrast I'm really
asking how does this story end this
story that's been going on for 2,000
years how is it gonna end I do not think
it's gonna end with YouTube channels and
Facebook posts seeing in a kind of
smarmy self-righteous way oh well isn't
it quaint that the legislators in Canada
still say prayers and in some cases
still have Christian crosses on the
walls yes your school both are deeply
flawed but I mean how do you actually
change the legal the fundamental basis
of the education in your society of
attitudes in your society of sure the
conduct of government in your society
it's this it's this huge challenge even
in a place that says ostensibly mild as
Canada I mean Canada is not Egypt
Egypt's a fascinating case study Egypt
is very far from being the most
fundamentalist Muslim country in the
world if anything Egypt is quite
moderate compared to Saudi Arabia but a
huge huge huge huge challenge to
secularize Egyptian society but even
looking at at British Columbia okay you
say you're an atheist activist you know
what what is what is the goal you're
pursuing and then how are you gonna
actually pursue it don't we have to
fundamentally move past this emotive and
emotional sharing of our problems on on
YouTube and sorry I'm a size in that
because that's that's the most
sympathetic element to me part of what's
going on atheist activism is a hundred
percent ego it's a hundred percent
people chasing Fame it's good-looking
young women who want to be the next
Jaclyn Glenn period and and some of
those women are not that young either
they're
good-looking middle-aged women there are
young men who want to be the next what's
the guy's name rationality rules they're
these cats they want to be famous and
they want to be admired and some of them
there's the further ego trip of wanting
to make ostentatious use of their book
learning of presenting themselves as an
expert in philosophy and logic and
science and region reason that's a
really toxic really not just future but
I do get it there are people who are way
more emotionally damaged than you are
you're really not emotionally messed up
by this at all there are people who are
emotionally damaged by the transition
they made from believing in God to
atheism and for whom they have that
touchstone they remember they remember
the crucial importance of some YouTube
video or of some personality on YouTube
talking about their own experience
talking about their own loss of faith
these kinds of things and then that has
become the dominant assumption of what
activism is supposed to be at what it
supposed to mean yeah I mean it's it's
hard to say what to do you know the
question is how is it going to end this
thousand years of Christianity major
religion or just you know how are we
going to actually live a secular society
I'm circumcised I am circumcised both of
my parents were atheists at the time of
my birth I think it takes accepting that
great
people just want to preach tolerance and
say you know tolerance or all different
religion ism
right it's obviously not true I mean the
mine is done what men every day in like
with baby is every day genital
mutilation on a massive scale it's you
know you know what nobody ever says
nobody ever says that tolerance and
progress are fundamentally incompatible
it was like I mean the tolerance sounds
like such an easy virtue to preach what
what's what's actually gonna change
about circumcision when is that gonna
end right like even the baby steps
towards ending it even if you don't make
it illegal overnight it's gonna be
intolerant it's gonna be confronting
tradition and saying no we're not going
to tolerate this or we don't want to
tolerate this tradition we want progress
from watching oh go go but you know but
it's gonna be activism of a very very
active kind it's it's not gonna be what
the Richard Dawkins foundation is doing
with its money and prestige and fame
which is nothing what they're doing is
nothing before making this video I went
and reread their charter or and you know
I looked at what it is they define
themselves as as doing you know I mean
so the term they like to use is
advancing secularism it's a little it's
a little bit vague it's a little bit
vague right I mean how are you gonna do
that a lot of this - it's really easy to
pick on the kind of low-hanging fruit
it's really easy to look at something
like the anti-vaccine controversy right
and say oh well we represent
enlightenment and science and modernity
whereas these people who are against
vaccinations want to drag us back into
the Stone Age that's that's a little bit
too easy for me that's a little bit
that's a little bit ideologically
convenient right you know you know
what's it can
what's inconvenient is saying to the
people of British Columbia Canada oh you
have this tradition of prayer at the
start of every session at the
legislature oh well guess what we want
to take that away from you there are
people who will fight back there are
people whose people will say no no no we
have a you know we have this tradition
going back however many centuries of
doing prayer here at the you know this
is their tradition this is their
religion there are chapels there were
religious you know buildings within our
Parliament Buildings in candid I know
there were I know there are in Ottawa at
least thinking both Ottawa and Quebec
and Ontario
you know the idea of having a chaplain
or something employed by the government
to say these prayers at the start of
legislative sessions and so on
this is this is a British Empire
tradition and say oh well guess what we
want to take away your tradition we want
to end that you know for our own reasons
and we're a minority we're not the
majority in this society that wants
wants the second set babe sorry good
point I don't want to change this habit
too much but having lived in China and
Taiwan right you know in Taiwan you walk
around and see Taoist temples you see a
society that is secular and people that
that stuff about that was you know about
I that's you know that's why I wanted to
make videos of a thousand I want you to
keep going but one of the reasons I
wanted to make videos talking about
Taoism is that most Westerners cannot
imagine how fundamentally different it
is to be in a society where Taoism is
the dominant religious tradition
religion right well I would say where
the meaning of religion itself is
fundamentally different because it's a
Taoist set of assumptions going yeah
yeah it's a huge huge difference yeah
and having went in China where you know
living really in a secular society all
right you know I think it's not the
disaster there are ways to study
different places in the world that are
actually you know secular so yeah a
terrible thing to and even a
even aggressively secular I mean sir
let's just pause right now China is in
the act of forcing Muslims to either
adopt moderate Islam or get out
you know it's they can either become
atheists or they can become moderate by
the definition the government set down
for them and there is there's no
tolerance there it's the end of
tolerance for for fundamentalist Islam
for authentic Islam I would say that's
no longer being tolerated in communist
China that's and that's a huge
fundamental turning point in their
history obviously I could no digress
into a long lecture about the history
but I'm not going to but yeah I just say
the example of China is not a passively
atheist or passively secular society
it's a very active muscular and even
oppressive model of atheism that we're
gonna have to write as a chapter in the
history books we're gonna have to learn
from that example the good and the bad
of it yeah sorry about going people that
will fight back against atheist
activists saying you don't have the
right to pray before you know
legislature was horn you know
proceedings happen in court and bring
you know in a sense I just see it as
kind of phony like phony tradition yeah
compared to the this tradition of Taoism
compared in other religions and the
Panthers because you know if you're
actually thinking about the place bridge
Claudia the tradition of the people like
the Native people that were there is
totally different you know you're
bringing your culture you're a long way
from you're a long way from Jerusalem
you're a long way from Damascus
[Laughter]
the new players can't I really can't we
just say yeah please because it's a
whole new thing you know look babe you
know look in North America's the site of
the worst genocide yeah worse
Constitution the competition for worst
genocide is pretty intense look I was
gonna tell you Manta this is an any
thought you never you've never heard for
me before back when I was in Toronto
I just finished at University of Toronto
was in the brief period when I collected
my university diploma but I was still
kind of on campus and I went in to talk
to an advisor and it turned out the
advisor was the president of that
division of the University not worth
describing a lot of big universities in
Canada or have multiple divisions so who
wasn't the president of the whole thing
but he was a very very powerful person
in the university and I recognized them
because he was the guy who said the
prayer at the ceremony where they gave
me my my diploma so I wasn't expecting
that I just knew I made a booking to see
an advisor I didn't really know was and
it turned out it was this guy and the
first thing I said to him and you know
you can be offensive without using a
single swear word but I said this in the
most jarring and offensive way possible
I said when you delivered that prayer
you know at the at the graduation
ceremony you know I didn't know if I
should leave the room or if I should
scream out to interrupt you if I should
shut up I was so offended I was so hurt
I was disgusted but whole ceremony of
what you did and again I mean you you
know me I'm capable of being very
intimidating I want to be see if there
was no there was no course language
involved and you know he was oh he was a
fully grown man I would guess he was in
his late 40s he you know he was shaken
up by my saying this to him and
obviously it was also totally unexpected
in the context for me to
it was unexpected but I kind of
recognized whoa this is a brief window
of opportunity where I can really
confront this guy about about secularism
or religion versus atheism in this and
this context and I really let him know
how how disgusted I was and what he said
back to me was a hundred percent sincere
he said that he had worked really hard
on the prayer and he thought he made a
prayer that included all of the world
religions and I said yeah what about
Hinduism
what about Buddhism what about the
native people whose land this university
was built on whether they're a jib way
or mohawk or you know what happened in
terms of including in terms of who he
survives today and we all know I mean
again religions are not all equal if he
had done a Taoist prayer it wouldn't fit
offensive if he had if he had actually
had someone in from say the curry or a
jib way community or even whatever the
last remnants of a you know some kind of
Iroquois you know community to do a
prayer it's a little bit different I
would rather have none of those
religions represented it's you know it's
not the same as the conquering Christian
faith celebrating itself this way and he
sat there his reaction to me he sat
there actually oh I guess you're right I
guess it's just Christianity Judaism and
Islam like it was basically a prayer to
Jesus but I didn't specify Jesus did may
not have you know he really thought he
was he was woke in delivering that that
prayer but look this is my conclusion
with that that meeting with someone in
an elite position of power I did not
feel like I'd accomplished anything I
didn't feel like this was effective
activism for me it was a reminder of how
powerless we are in the face of that
kind of tradition I would bet money that
the next year they did the same ceremony
he you know III don't think anything
changed
that challenge I mean I think it
probably for him probably that guy is
watching this video I think he
remembered that meeting for the rest of
his life because he was not used to
students being that aggressive the
warden so hey hey guys keep keep it
legal but I mean I really managed to
ruffle the feathers of an authority
figure on that in that meeting but I
came away from that with an even deeper
appreciation of how powerless I am and
we are even in Canada Canada is not
Egypt but in Canada religion is is
written in the Constitution okay babe
the video is past 30 minutes so I'm just
gonna wrap it up there we can keep
talking offline you guys know what it is
hit the subscribe button
Abell SEO
[Music]